
When time is limited and there is much sewing to do, look for materials that are easy to handle.

• Firm, closely woven fabrics are easy to cut out, can often be finger pressed and so save frequent trips to the ironing board, and because they don't fray, need little seam finishing. Ginghams, percales, and dress weight chambrays are examples of materials that can usually be made up quickly.

• Plain colors, allover prints, or small woven checks or stripes are quicker to cut out and put together than are larger plaids or stripes that must be matched to look well and so take much time and painstaking care both in cutting and putting together.

• Less material is needed for prints with no up and down than for directional prints, and less time is required to lay out the pattern. Less material is also needed for reversible fabrics that are the same on both sides than for fabrics with a right and a wrong side. Some materials require careful sewing and skillful handling and take more time to make up well.

• Slippery fabrics, such as silk or synthetic sheers, are hard to cut out because they t\<'ist and slip ; they also are hard to sew accurately.

• Loosely woven fabrics—voiles, silk or synthetic sheers, linens and rayons with a linen look, and tweeds—need a special seam finish to prevent fraying, so take extra time.

• Some materials are hard to sew. Very closely woven ones, such as balloon cloth, some of those treated with special finishes, and others made of some of the new manmade fibers, need special thread and machine adjustments to prevent
puckered stitching. Pile fabrics, too—velvet,
velveteen, and corduroy—need careful basting to keep the material from slipping as it is being stitched. All these materials are also hard to
press. Straightening the material before the pattern pieces are laid on it assures that the clothes will hang as well after washing or cleaning as they did before. Fabrics are always woven so the lengthwise yarns are at right angles to the crosswise ones, but they are often distorted in finishing so
they look crooked.

When material needs to be straightened, first see that each end of the fabric is cut along a crosswise yarn. Many cottons, such as percale, chambray,
and gingham, and some silk crepes, taifetas, and wool ñannels can usually be straightened at the ends by tearing them crosswise. Other materials,
such as voile, linen, spun rayon, sateens, and many novelty weaves, do not tear satisfactorily, so the ends should be straightened by pulling out one or
two crosswise yarns and cutting along the open spaces. Materials with heavy crosswise yarns that are easy to follow can be cut along one of
these yams. 

If the yarns at each end seem to run downhill instead of straight across, the material needs to be straightened.
Most fabrics can be straightened by stretching the material on the bias between the low corner at one end and the opposite selvage, and then pulling crosswise from selvage to selvage. Cottons with glazed or other special finishes may have to be folded lengthwise, pinned across the ends and along the selvages, and then steam pressed, pulling the yarns into position as you press. 

Some of these materials may need to be wet thoroughly, then pulled into shape and ironed. Wools, if they are very crooked, may need to be steam pressed. Press out the lengthwise fold after the fabric is straightened.

PATTERNS

In the construction of clothing, selecting a pattern wisely can be a material help. A pattern that is the right size can save alteration and fittingtime. Therefore, before a pattern is bought, it is important to check certain body measurements—chest, bust or breast, waist, hip, arm length, and back length. These measurements can be compared with those in the charts in the pattern books as a guide to classification and size of the pattern to buy. 

For irregular figures, patterns should be altered before the garment is cut
out. For beginners or those who have much sewing to do, it is a good idea to use patterns with style features that can be made well in a fairly short
time and that need a minimum of fitting. 

Some style features to consider are the following :

Sleeves, raglan, or shirt-type sleeves are easier to fit and make than set-in or epaulet styles. Underarm gussets make close-fitting kimono sleeves more comfortable, but since the corners are weak, they require careful reinforcement and therefore take more time and skill to make than the ordinary kimono sleeve.

CUTTING

For ease in cutting a garment, lay out the material, right sides together, so tlie marking can be done on the wrong side. Then place the pattern pieces accurately on the material according to the pattern layout suggested for the size and width of the fabric. 

Make sure the straight-of-goods marks are an even distance from the selvage, 
so each garment section will be cut exactly with the grain of the goods.
Accurate cutting saves time. Smooth seam edges are easier to sew evenly and to hold against the cloth stitching guide tlian those that are uneven and jagged.
Some women like to save time by cutting several garments at once. 

For this purpose the layers of fabric must be laid out perfectly straight and
smooth, with the edges pinned carefully together to keep the material from slipping. Care must be taken that all the necessary pieces are provided for and cut out; when the fabric is laid out in single layers, it is easy to forget the second sleeve or collar. Extra time will be needed for sections
that must be laid on a lengthwise fold of the material, and for accurately marking the pattern perforations.

More than six layers of lightweight material, such as gingham, chambray, or percale, are extremely hard to pin and cut at one time with home equipment. Six layers mean that three garments from the double fabric, or six garments from opened-out fabric can be cut, but this cutting requires a pair of sturdy, bent-handle shears and a strong hand. Smaller scissors are not heavy enough. When several garments are to be cut out at once, patterns with simple, straight lines are easier to manage.

MARKING

Time can be saved in putting the garment together if all the necessary pattern perforations, such as those for darts, pleats, plackets, and buttonholes, are marked before the tissue pattern is unpinned. However, all the stitching lines may not need to be marked. For example, seam allowances need not be marked if the seam width allowed in the pattern is carefully followed.

Straiglit darts can be marked at the wide section and at the point; 
then a guideline for stitching can be drawn between these two points at tlie left of the fold. Construction lines may be marked in several ways:

Colored-chalk pencil and colored-carbon
paper.
—These materials afford an easy way of marking most firmly woven materials since two garment pieces can be marked at once. Place the carbon under the garment section and mark lightly on tlie top section with the pencil sharpened to a fine point, so the marks won't show when the garment is finished. Be sure to mark only on the wrong side of the fabric. 

A small ruler and the pencil and carbon paper may be used to draw short stitching lines. Tracing wheel and colored-carbon paper.
—A tracing wheel is used the same way as the colored pencil and the carbon paper, but the tracing wheel is harder to guide tlian a pencil and leaves more marks that are hard to remove.

Tailor's tacks.—Tailor's tacks may be used for transferring pattern markings to loosely woven materials and some allover prints where chalk or tracing-wheel marks might not show readily. Make them of contrasting embroidery cotton which has little tendency to pull out of the material. Remove the threads before machine stitching, as they are hard to get out once they are caught in with the stitching. Pins.—Darts, tucks, and pleats can be marked with clean pins that won't leave dark marks when they are removed. Pin through both layers in the center of the pattern marking ; then lift the material carefully and put a pin through the bottom layer in the hole made by the first pin. Anchor each pin firmly so it won't drop out. Pins have an
advantage over pencil or tracing marks as the pins can be seen on both the right and the wrong sides.

Snips.
—In the seam edges, notches or dart ends may be marked by making a very short straight cut or snip in the center of each notch or in line
with perforations. Snips should be used sparingly, as they may interfere with alterations.
BASTING
For best results some type of basting is usually
needed to hold two pieces of a garment together for
fitting or stitching.
Pin-basting.—If no fitting will be needed,
straight edges in firm materials may be held adequately with pins put in at right angles to the
edge, but enough pins must be used to keep the
material fiat and the seam edges together. This
method is called pin-basting. Put the pins in so
they can be taken out with the free hand during
stitching and thus avoid sewing over the pins and
breaking or blunting the machine needle.
Another way of pin-basting firm materials is to
place the pins about 1 inch from the edge and
parallel to it. This saves stitching time and also
eliminates the danger of breaking or blunting the
needle. Pin-basting should not be used on slippery materials such as synthetic sheers or on pile
fabrics—the edges will not stay together unless
they are held more securely.
Machine-basting.—This basting, made with
long macliine stitches about 6 or 8 to the incli, is
a quick way of getting a garment ready for fitting, and the basting lines can be made straiglit.
Sucli basting is harder to take out than liandbasting, and it cannot be pulled out quickly while
the garment is being fitted, which is sometimes
necessary.
Hand-basting is particularly helpful when sewing curved edges as on collars, or putting in
sleeves, or wlien considerable fitting needs to be
done.
Slip-basting—catching a folded edge to a flat
section with slip stitclies—is necessary when basting needs to be done from the right side as when
matching uneven plaids or doing intricate seaming.
A combination of pin and thread-basting may
be the most satisfactory method for most sewing.
Time can often be saved by pinning togetlier su(;h
edges as skirt seams, slioulder and underarm
seams, and sleeve seams. However, when setting
in sleeves or attaching a collar to a neck, basting
helps to make the stitching quick, easy, and more
accurate.
To tliread-baste, use a contrasting thread and
baste slightly outside the stitcliing line so the
basting will not get caught in with the stitching.
Cut off basting knots before stitching to keep
from sewing them in witli the stitcliing.
MACHINE SEWING
A cloth or seam guide (fig. 17) is a most useful
machine attachment for sewing seams. Fasten it
the width of tlie seam allowance from the needle
point; then liold the seam edges steadily against
it during tlie stitching. If the seam edges are
even, tlie stitching line will be even. This guide
works equally well for edge stitching.
FIGURE 17'^^ ïinijf* Ik •
il..-
> * * * j^'
#*
■^■r^ i^*r
'^'"h'-^ tij* '1^ sr 4r '«^'wr-^ m*'#' ^"4^'
^
FIGURE 21
-- *>
A*
FIGURE 22
^
FIGURE 23
. Stitches of an ordinary length, between 12 and
16 to the incli, are good for most liome sewing.
When stitcliing around points or into corners
where the material will be cut close to tlae stitching, shorten the stitch to around 20 and 25 to the
inch. Use reverse stitcliing on inside seams wliere
it is essential that the stitcliing does not open.
Reverse stitclies should not be used on outside
stitching where appearance is important, or at
tlie ends of darts, as reverse stitches rarely fit
exactly into stitches made with the forward motion and make tlie stitching bulky. Reverse
stitching is particularly useful on school or utility
clothes.
Choose a seam finish suited to tlie material and
the garment. Plain seams may be adequate on
fabrics that are firm and do not fray easily. Materials that fray, or are bulky, need special seam
finishing for durability and professional appearance.
Double-stitched and pinked seam (fig. 18).—
For use on cotton wash clotlies made of firmly
woven fabrics, such as gingham, percale, and
chambray. These seams are durable, firm, and
easy to make; they also are easy to iron as they
iron straight and smootli from the right side, and
tlie double stitching keeps them from stretching.
Closed and zigzagged seam (fig. 19) .—For use
on sleazy, loosely woven, or easily frayed fabrics
that need special seam finishing. Machine-zigzagging or overcasting usually keeps such materials from fraying. This seam is also easy to iron
from the right side.
Opened and pinked seam (fig. 20).—For use
on thick or heavy fabrics, such as embossed or
sculptured cottons, and some silks, rayons, and
wools that do not fray.
Opened, stitched, and pinked seam (fig. 21) .—
For use on wool jersey or on bias seams; the extra
rows of stitching help prevent stretcliing and
also keep jersey seams from rolling.
Double-stitched and trimmed seam (fig. 22) .—
For use on laces and eyelet embroideries that require a flat, narrow, inconspicuous, yet durable
seam.
Opened and overcast seam (fig. 23).—For use
on lieavier fabrics that may fray, such as linen,
cotton crash, linen-weave silks and rayons, and
denim. Tlie edges may be overcast by hand or
zigzagged on a swing-needle machine or with a
special attacliment.
French seam (fig. 24).—For use on sheer cottons, silks, and syntlietics, such as voiles and sheer
fabrics, that are likely to fray badly.Self-stitched seam (fig. 25).—For use on fabrics that fray too much to be overcast. This seam
is also used on unlined jackets or coats of cottons,
rayons, and some lightweight wools.
Zigzagged seam (ñg. 26).—For use on lingerie
materials. It is stitched on the wrong side,
pressed to one side, then zigzagged from the right
side over the seam line. It is an elastic seam so
is often used on slips. It is hard to wash clean,
especially if dark clothes rub against a light-colored seamFlat-fell seam (fig. 27).—For use on men's and
boys' shirts and work clothes. This seam with no
raw edges is durable, but has a tendency to pucker
with laundering and is hard to iron. It takes
longer to make than many other seams.
Mock flat-fell seam (fig. 28).—For use on men's
and boys' shirts and work clothes when a flatfell seam is too heavy. It resembles a flat-fell
seam in outside appearance, but is less bulky and
easier to make. On the wrong side it has one
raw edge which can be pinked or zigzagged if
the fabric frays.
Bound seam (fig. 29).—For use on fabrics that
fray badly. Net footing when used to bind seams
on colored sheers, such as voile, makes the seams
look less heavy than French seams. Rayon binding makes a neat seam finish for unlined jackets
and coats of wool; on fabrics of manmade fibers,
however, binding leaves an imprint on the right
side.
ORGANIZING HOME SEWING
Time can be saved by organizing home sewing—
planning how much stitching can be done at one
time without interfering with the next steps—
then how much trimming, turning, basting, and
pressing are necessary before the next trip to the
machine. Although planning is particularly easy
when a garment can be made up without any fitting, it also helps to reduce the number of fittings.
A sport shirt is used here to illustrate how
planned construction can save time. The same
procedure can be followed, whether one shirt or
several are to be made (fig. 30).
Pin:
1. Back pleats.
2. Yoke and yoke facing to back.
3. Shoulders of yoke facing to shirt fronts.
4. Interfacing to undercollar.
Fold :
5. Pocket hem to right side.
6. Pocket hem up about 14 inch.
press.
Pin:
7. Pocket hem ed^es.
Finser-
#■■
<.;; TfC- «• —i> .
ÍV
""^; >
/ *ri -î^H. >
V ^. A ef« *v
FIGURE 24
l'"i.;i i:r 2
■^^^m^^^^^™^v«,.,.^^.„,,v-.^v,-„v«vwww^
l''i(iiiU': 26
A..:
FIGURE 27
ïKKÎiVSfi^SLÎf*
All-"****' > ^1 f < # t '
.,.>
'■SI» .t-1f '•'i\
>
FIGURE 28
^ I
\ ,-fp^.
5.- '■■: '¡-■Mi^:-^
FIGURE 29FIGURE 30
Stitch :
8. Yoke and yoke facing to back.
9. Shoulders of yoke facing to shirt fronts.
10. Interfacing to undercoUar along crease
marks.
11. Pocket hem edges a seam's width and the
depth of the hem.
Trim :
12. Shoulder seams.
13. Pocket hem edges.
Clip:
14. Corners of pocket seams.
Press as much as possible, baste where necessary, then continue the stitching.
\,
/m
15 8
II
Press (fig. 31):
1. Yoke and yoke facing toward neck.
2. Turn under and press shoulder seams of
yoke.
3. Turn under and press shoulder and front
edges of facings.
4. Turn pocket hem right side out; turn
under sides and bottom of pocket ; press.
Pin, baste, if necessary :
5. Back yokes together.
6. Shoulder seams of yoke over seam of yoke
facing, covering the machine-stitching.
7. Top collar to undercoUar and interfacing.
Stitch:
8. Back yokes about i/g inch above seam line.
9. Shoulder seams of yoke.
10. Shoulders and front edges of facings.
11. Pocket hem.
12. Top collar to undercoUar and interfacing.
Trim :
13. Seam edges of collar to % inch.
Clip:
14. Collar corners, almost to stitching.
\^l1
.#^■
..^ 1
:jy-'"'''
'-^3 4 2 i
9
.0
i _
FIGURE 31
FIGURE 32
Clip (fig. 32) :
1. Armhole edges at underarm area, cutting
about % inch deep.
2. Top collar at shoulder points, cutting in a
seam's depth.
Turn :
3. Collar right side out.
4. Seam allowance of top collar under between shoulder points.
Pin, baste, if necessary:
5. Sleeve to armhole, stretching shirt armhole at underarm to fit sleeve.
6. Pocket to shirt front.
7 Collar edges, with seam line on the edge;
work the corners out to a point; finger
press or press.stitch:
8. Sleeve to armliole. , -
9. Pocket to shirt front.
10. Around collar the desired width from the
edge.
FIGURE 33
Pin (fig. 33) :
1. Collar to neckline.
2. Front facings back over neck.
Press :
3. Armhole seams toward sleeve.
4. Front facing edges.
Stitch:
5. Collar to neck and facing.
8. Bottom of front facings, even with the
hemline.
Trim :
7. Neck seam edge to % or %Q inch.
8. Seam at bottom of front facing to % inch.
9. Armhole seam allowance of sleeve to %6
inch.
Clip:
10. Corner at front edges.
Stitch:
11. Finish seams as flat fell, mock flat fell, or
leave plain and pink or zigzag, if necessary, to prevent fraying.
Stitch (fig. 34) :
1. Underarm and sleeve seams.
Turn and press; baste, if necessary:
2. Front facings back to wrong side.
3. Seams.
4. Vent hems, if vents are desired.
5. Shirt hem.
6. Sleeve hems.
Y. Neck edge of collar to back of neck.
782-691 0—65—2
FIGURE 34
Stitch:
8. At vent, turn hem to right side, stitch
vent through hem on the side seam line.
Trim:
9. Vent seam edge to %^ inch.
Turn and press :
10. Vent and hem to wrong side, creasing on
stitching line.
Stitch:
11. Shirt hem and around vents beginning at
bottom of front facing.
12. Sleeve hem.
13. Back neck edge of collar to neck of shirt.
14. Shoulder edges of front facings to shoulder seams.
NOTE.—13 and 14 may be stitched by hand or by machine.
Dresses, blouses, and other garments can be
made as eíRciently as sliirts, provided they do not
require fitting. Stitch all darts or tucks; attach
the cloth or seam guide and sew all the seams;
stitch the collars and cuiïs; then lengthen the
stitch and do all the gathering necessary while the
cloth guide is in place. This gathering may include sleeve caps, waistline edges of skirt or blouse,
or elbow ease, depending on the style. After as
much of the stitching has been done as possible,
trim seam allowances where needed, snip corners,
pink or edge-finish the seams, turn collars and
cuiïs right side out, and press so every edge will
be ready for the next stitching.
SIMPLIFYING CONSTRUCTION
Much of the detailed work of sewing—so important to the good appearance of a finished garment—can be simplified without either durabilityor good workmanship being sacrificed. In fact,
appearance is often improved by the flat construction characteristic of the simplified procedures
presented in the following pages. To simplify
sewing does not necessarily mean the elimination
of basting, when basting is necessary to help
achieve the desired results ; it may also mean the
inclusion of some extra steps which may take a
little extra time, but will make the construction
process easier to do. For example, taking time to
trim the seam allowance of a curved collar to %
or %6 inch saves time in turning the collar, and
results in a more even collar edge than would be
possible if the seam edge were not trimmed.
Making Collars
Round collars.—Kound collars are used on
many types of garments, but the method of making them is the same. The curve at each end of
the collar must be identical; to make it so, draw
a stitching line around each curve with a cup,
saucer, or other round object of the right size being used as the pattern; or, make a paper pattern.
To make the collar—
1. Seam the top and the undercollars together, right sides inside (fig. 35). If the material is soft and likely to stretch, make a whole
FIGURE 35
paper pattern and sew through it ; or use a thin
interfacing of preshrunk fabric.
2. Trim the seam allowance to %6 or % inch
(fig. 36); bevel the edges of thick materials;
that is, trim one edge about %6 i^c^i narrower
than the other.
3. Clip out small wedges of the seam around
the curves to avoid lumpiness and so make a
smooth flat edge when turned.
4. Turn the collar right side out; crease on
the seam line ; baste to keep it in place until the
collar is stitched to the garment; press. On
thick materials, ease the seam line slightly to the
under side to keep it from rolling to the right
side and showing.
Shirt collars.—Shirt collars are used on sport
shirts, blouses, dresses, and on some jackets and
coats. Lighter weight garments, such as dresses
and blouses, are made the same way, but usually
the stitching in Step 1, figure 37, is omitted.
FIGURE 36
FIGURE 37
1. Pin the interfacing to the undercoUar;
stitch on the perforations marking the roll line.
2. Pin the top collar to the undercoUar, interfacing outside. Draw a straight stitching line
on each end of the collar; a bias edge such as
this is hard to stitch exactly straight, even with
a seam guide, and a guideline helps. Adjust
the stitches to about 20 to the inch and stitch
around the collar edges a seam's width from the
edge.
3. Take one stitch across the corner, instead
of pivoting the ends. This stitch allows room
for the seam edges when the collar is turned
right side out. If the material is thick or
bulky, about three stitches around the corner
may be needed.
4. Trim the seam allowance to about % inch
on firm materials, %6 iiich on fabrics that are.
likely to fray.
105. Clip off the corners almost to the stitclimg, so they will be sharp and flat when turned.
6. Turn the collar right side out, with the
seam on tlie edge; work the corners out carefully to a point; a blunt darning needle is good
for tliis. Baste, if necessary; press. Stitch
evenly around the outside edge of the collar
the desired width from the edge. This stitching gives a sliarp edge and makes ironing easy
but is often omitted on dresses, blouses, and
outerwear.
Attaching Collars
Collars sewed on with a shaped facing.—The
following metliod is a quick and easy one for
attaching collars to school and utility clothes.
However, it is not generally used on better garments, as the neckline is ratlier bulky and tlierefore does not set so well to tlie neck as when a bias
facing is used. Also, it does not press or iron so
well (fig. 38).
FIGURE 38
1. Seam the front and the back facings together at the shoulder. Clip tlie seam ends
diagonally to the stitcliing so the neck and outer
edges will be less bulky when finished.
2. Turn the outer edge of the facing under
and machine-stitch ; or pink or zigzag the edge,
depending on the firmness of the material.
3. Clip the neck edge of the blouse and the
facing about i/4 inch deep and i/4 indi apart;
this makes it easier to fit the neck edges together.
4. Pin the collar to the neck of the blouse.
5. Turn and pin the front facings back over
the collar.
6. Pin the shaped facing to the collar and the
neckline, matching the slioulder seams.
7. Baste with rather small stitches to hold
the collar in place and to make a guideline for
stitchiiig ; machine-stitch.
8. Trim the seam allowance to 1/4 inch or
less.
9. Turn the collar to the outside and facing
to the inside; press.
10. To keep the facing from rolling up,
stitch it around the neck edge close to tlie collar,
sewing only the facing and the neck seam.
11. Tack the neck facing to the shoulder
seams, the center front facings, and the back
darts, to keep it in place during wear and
cleaning.
Collars sewed on with a bias facing.—Most
collars set to the neck better if they are sewed
on with a bias facing, but the facing must be
smooth, flat and narrow—about 1/4 inch wide or
less, depending on the material. On lightweight
wash fabrics use a facing of self-material, or a
commercial bias binding; on wool garments use
matching silk or rayon. On medium weight or
heavier materials, such as gingham, cotton, crash,
linen, and some wools, use a single facing.
On thin fabrics, such as voile or batiste, use a
double facing, which is easy to put on. Cut it
twice the seam allowance width, plus the desired
width of the finished facing. A double facing
is shown in figure 39.
FIGURE 39
i. Pin the collar to the neckline, clipping the
curved neck edges as needed.
2. Turn the front facing in place back over
the collar and pin.
113. Steam-press and curve the bias to almost
the same shape as the curved neck edge (see
Binding, page 13) ; then pin the shaped bias
strip to the coUar and tlie neck edge. Baste
witli stitches sliort enougli to hold a good curved
line. Machine-stitch.
4. Trim the neck seam allowance to about %ß
inch or less; clip where necessary to make it lie
flat.
5. Turn the facing to the inside of the garment. Press. Press the bias facing flat
against the blouse.
6. Sew the bias facing edge to the blouse,
catching in the edge of the front facing. Machine-stitching may be used on school, play, or
utility clothes; use hand sewing on better
garments.
Convertible collar—^sport-shirt method.—
This method is a quick one foi- attaching a
straight or shaped collar to sport shirts or school
or work clothes. It is not suited to better garments where a flat neck join is desirable (fig. 40).
4. Turn and pin the front facings back over
the collar-, the neck edges matching. Baste, if
needed.
5. Machine-stitch the neck seam, being careful not to catch the turned-up edge of the top
collar.
6. Trim the seam allowance to about 1/4 inch.
7. Turn the facings to the wrong side Cfig.
41).
8. Pin or baste the loose edge of the top collar
over the machine-stitching. Machine-stitch
over the neck seam or hem by hand.
9. Sew the facings to the shoulder seam, by
hand or machine.
Convertible collar—dressmaker method.—
This method gives a smooth flat front joining of
the collar with the facing, and is suitable to use
on better clothes and some tailored garments such
as coats and suits. The collar pieces are attached
to the facing and neck edges and then the collar
is completed (fig. 42).
FIGURE 40
FIGURE 41
1. Clip the top collar a seam's depth at the
shoulder points. Turn under this seam allowance across the back between the shoulder
points.
2. Pin the collar to the neckline; snip the
curved neck edges where needed.
3. Pin or stitch a fabric loop to the left front
neck, if for a boy's or man's shirt.
FIGURE 42
1. Clip the curved neck edges to within 1/4
inch of the seam line so it can be fitted to a
straight collar.
2. Pin, baste, and stitch the undercoUar to the
neck of the blouse.
3. Pin, baste, and stitch the top collar to the
two front facings.
4. Trim the neck seam allowances to i/4 inch.
5. Clip the tight curved edges.
6. Press the seams open.
7. Pin, baste, and stitch the top collar and the
facings to the undercoUar and the blouse
fronts, right sides together.
8. Trim the seam allowances to i/g or i/4 inch.
9. Clip tlie corners almost to the stitching,
so they will be sharp and flat when turned.
10. Turn the collar and the facings right side
out, with the seam light on the edge on lightweight fabrics; on wools or heavier materials,
roll the seam line slightly to the underside.
Baste (fig. 43).
12FIGURE 43
11. Clip the top collar at the shoulder points
to the seam line.
12. Trim the collar seam allowance across the
back of the neck to % inch. Turn under to the
seam line.
13. Sew the collar to the back neck seam by
hand.
14. Tack the shoulder edges of the front facings to the shoulder seams by hand.
Finishing Edges
Binding«—A strong, easy-to-make neck or sleeve
finish (fig. 44).
FIGURE 44
1. Dampen and press a single- or a doublebias binding so it has almost the same curve as
the neck. When a single binding is used, leave
the outer edge folded. Preshaped binding fits
smoothly to a curved edge and insures a better
finish than when the binding is eased on.
2. Baste and stitch to neck. If a commercial
binding is used, lay the inside fold line against
the seam line, or trim the neck seam to tlie same
widtli.
3. If a double binding is used, stitch to the
neck, then trim the seam allowance to i/g or
3/i6 inch.
4. Press the seams and binding towai'd the
neck.
5. Fold tlie binding smoothly over the seam
edges, working from the right side to insure
an even width.
6. If the binding is to be sewed down by machine, fold it so the edge comes about i^e inch
past the seam line. Baste ; press.
7. Machine-stitch from the right side, very
close to the seam line.
8. If the binding is to be sewed down by
hand, make the folded edge come just inside the
seam line. Baste, press. Then sew by hand to
the first row of stitching.
Facing.—A smooth, flat finish for collarless
necks, sleeves without cuffs, or sleeveless garments ;
also for front openings and other edges. If
the pattern does not include facings, they can be
out according to the pattern edge to be faced
(fig. 4.5).
■ FIGURE 45
1. Stitch any seams necessary in the facing,
as at the shoulders, and press open. Be sure before stitching that the facing fits the garment
edge exactly.
2. Stitch the facing to the garment.
13n.
3. Trim the seam allowance to i/4 inch. Clip
any corners almost to the stitching.
4. Press the seam edge and the facing away
from the garment.
5. Stitch the seam edges and the facing together close to the neck seam line, taking care not
to stitch through the garment. This stitching
helps keep the faced edge flat and the seam
line slightly underneath.
6. Finish the inside edge of the facing, either
with pinking, or with zigzagging, or by turning
and stitching, according to the firmness of the
material. Tack the facing firmly to the darts
and the seams ; if it needs to be fastened to the
body of the garment, use tiny, loose stitches
spaced an inch or so apart so they will not show
or pucker on the right side.
Rickrack.—An edge finish that is strong, attractive, and practical for school and utility
clothes made of materials that do not fray badly.
Shown here as a finish for a neckline (fig. 46).
- 2 '■ ■-:.4-
i^M^M*illilitÍÉÍIItl*giiii
FIGURE 47
DN-1117A
i^HHHI y V ■-A n1._^...,a^1 ■
FIGURE 48
asaeî'f*'
FIGURE 46
1. Machine-stitch a fold line slightly less than
a seam's width from the edge to be finished.
2. Trim the seam allowance to % inch.
3. Turn the seam edge to the wi'ong side,
folding just past the stitching line ; press.
4. Pin and baste the rickrack over the fold
so that only the points show on the right side.
5. On the right side, machine-stitch close to
the fold.
6. Stitch again on the right side, tlie width of
the presser foot beyond the first stitching. This
second row of stitching holds tlie inside points
of the rickrack and the raw edges fiat.
Notches and scallops.—An inexpensive, decorative, and easy way of macliine-finishing
straight, curved, or bias edges such as are found
on collars, front openings, sleeves, and hems of
firm materials (figs. 47-49).
FIGURE 49
1. On the wrong side of the material mark
stitching lines accurately. With a ruler draw
the notches and the lines between; draw scallops with a scalloped ruler or a paper pattern
made from a round object of the right size,
such as a cup, saucer, or bottle.
2. Machine-stitch along the stitching lines
with small stitches about 18 to 25 to the inch.
3. Instead of pivoting the needle at each
point, make one stitch parallel to the edge between each notch or scallop. The points will
then be sharp, strong, and shaped so they can
be tui'ned smoothly.
4. Trim the seam edges to % inch. A narrow
seam allowance makes it easy to turn scallops
smoothly and helps give a good curve.
5. Clip almost to the stitching at the points.
6. Trim the outside corners of the notches.
7. Turn riglit side out, working the seams
out to the edge and forming sharp corners.
8. Finger-press or baste along the seam edge ;
press. (To finish the facing edge, see Finishing
Hems, pp. 23,24.)
14Making Plackets
Faced placket.—A strong, flat, easy-to-make
placket for neck or sleeve openings. It is suitable
for use on firm fabrics, but the seam allowance at
the point is too narrow for use on fabrics that
fray badly. A straight strip of fabric may be
used for this facing, or the whole front neck may
be faced as in figure 50. Use the blouse pattern
to cut such a facing. Do not cut the opening
until after the stitching is done.
FIGURE 50
1. Draw stitching lines on each side of the
center line, starting %^ inch from the center at
the top and tapering almost to the center front
line at the bottom ; leave just enough space here
for one small stitch between the two lines.
Stitch on these lines with small stitches, from 20
to 25 to the inch.
2. Cut down the center just to the stitching.
3. Turn the facing to the wrong side, exactly
on the stitching line ; press.
4. Reinforce the point with tiny blanket
stitches worked with matching thread; give it
additional strength with a blanket-stitched
thread bar, about y^ inch above the point.
Bound placket.—A placket that is stronger,
neater, and easier to make than the conventional
continuous bound opening. Can be used on most
materials except sheers such as voiles wJiere the
placket ends would show through. Best fastenings—thread loops. Do not slash the binding or
the opening before stitching (fig. 51).
FIGURE 51
1. For the binding cut a straight strip of
fabric about 1 inch longer than the opening and
about 1% inches wide; the binding will be
about Yg inch wide when finished. Pin it in
place and mark the cutting line down the center
of this strip.
2. Machine-stitch straight down each side
and straight across the bottom about % inch or
so from the cutting line.
3. (yut on the cutting line to about % or,16 3{
inch from the bottom; slash diagonally into
each corner just to the stitching so the binding
will turn back smoothly. If the material is
thick, the fabric may need to be trinuued off a
little on each side of the cutting line so the
binding can meet in the center and not overlap.
15FIGURE 52
4. Fold the binding in half so the raw edges
meet the stitching lines. Pull the bottom of the
binding through to the wrong side and crease
on the stitching line.
5. Turn the binding evenly over the raw
edges of the opening so that the folds meet at
the center.
6. To finish the binding by hand, turn it so
that the outer fold comes just to the stitching
on the wrong side. Hem or slip stitch.
7. For a machine finish, turn the binding so
the outer fold extends about i/m inch past the
stitching on the wrong side. From the right
side machine-stitch along the binding as close
to the stitching as possible.
8. Fold the bottom of the opening back close
against the stitching and sew by machine along
the fold and along the line of the first stitching ; catch in the point as you sew.
If the material is thick, omit Step 4 ; leave the
underneath edge flat and finish as in Step 7, either
by hand with small seed stitches or by machine.
Insert extension band.—A simplified method
of making a front placket for sport shirts, blouses,
and dresses. Resembles an applied placket but is
stronger and easier to make and to iron. The
pattern pieces included for an applied placket
can be used in making this inset band (fig. 52).
1. Mark the fold lines on the garment a
seam's width from the edge.
2. Cut just to the corners.
3. Turn under the seam allowance on the fold
lines.
4. Turn the corners under sharply ; work any
short yam ends to the underside and damp
press.
DN-n22 FIGURE 53 """""^
5. Fold the bands lengthwise down the middle, right side inside ; press.
6. Stitch the neck edges of the bands as far
as the center front marks.
7. Trim the seam allowances to about %s
inch ; clip the corners almost to the stitching.
8. Clip to the stitching at the center front.
9. Turn the bands right side out; press.
10. Pin the right band over the left, with the
center fronts matching. Reverse for men's
and boys' shirts.
11. Pin and baste the blouse over the bands
with the center fronts in line and the seam edges
matching on the wrong side (fig. 53).
12. Machine-stitch close to the fold. For a
tailored effect, stitch again the width of the
wide or the narrow edge of the presser foot
from the first stitching.
Fly-front for shorts (underwear type).—A
simplified way of finishing the fly front, usually
the hardest step in making shorts. Complete the
placket before stitching the seams, as it is easier
to make when the sections are flat (fig. 54).
1. Clip in to the bottom of the placket on
both the right and the left front sections.
2. Fold the hem of the left front under on
the center-front marks.
3. Turn under a 14-inch seam allowance;
finger press.
4. Machine-stitch the facing to the right
front, right sides together.
5. Trim the seam allowance to % inch.
6. Clip, turn under, and press the crotch
seam allowance of the left front. Trim the
seam to about % inch from the fold (fig. 55).
16\
4
im .lililí 11JU1..JIU111
15
15
10
!3
12 13
14
FIGURE 54 FIGURE 55 FIGURE 56
7. Fold the crotch seam allowance of the
right front to the right side of the material;
make a fold about % inch wide. Press. Trim
the seam edge to about % inch.
8. Machine-stitch the facing to the right
front and continue stitching along the fold of
the crotcli seam.
9. Machine-stitch the hem on the left front
and continue stitching along the fold of the
crotch seam.
10. Lap, pin, and baste the left front and
the left crotch seam over the right front and
the right crotch seam, covering the machine
stitching (Step 8) and the raw edges of the
crotcli seams (hg. 56).
11. To stitch the crotch seam and the placket
reinforcement, machine-stitch along the fold of
the crotch seam, beginning at the bottom of the
seam ; stitch up to the mark indicating the bottom of the placket.
12. Stitch across the placket about 14 inch
and down the other side of the crotch seam.
13. Starting with several rows of forward
and reverse stitches, stitch across the stitching
line at the bottom of the placket, then down to
the top of the crotch seam following the
curved stitching line on the left front.
14. Reinforce the crotch seam and the placket
w^itli several rows of forward and reverse
stitching.
15. Stitch the top of the placket along the
stitching marks.
Fly for slacks, shorts, and other trousers.—
Full directions for making this rather difßcult
placket simplify the process considerably. In
making this fly, the facing for the left front and
the top facing for the right front are made of
the trouser fabric. For visual clarity, the facings shown here are all of contrasting material.
The underfacing of the right front is cut with a
lower extension to be used in reinforcing the
crotcli seam. If the pattern does not have this
extension, add it when cutting the facings. Com-
17FiGUEE 57
píete this placket before stitching the side and
inseams (fig. 57).
1. Stitch the front crotch seam; press open.
2. Stitch the facing to the left front of the
opening, right sides together.
3. Stitch the extension pieces together.
4. Trim the seam allowances to % inch or a
little more.
5. Turn under the seam allowance on the
right front opening; press.
6. Turn the extension pieces right side out
with the seam worked out to the edge ; baste and
press.
7. Turn the facing of the left front to the
inside, with the seam line slightly underneath;
baste, if necessary; press (fig. 58).
8. Pin the zipper to the right side of the
opening.
9. Lay the extension piece under the right
front and the zipper, with the raw edges of the
extension even with the raw edges of the right
front. Pin and baste.
10. Machine-stitch as close as possible to the
zipper, using the zipper foot, making sure the
zipper pull will clear the fabric and not catch
in it.
11. With the zipper closed, pin the left front
over the right front, covering the line of machine stitching. Pin through the zipper tape
and the extension piece (fig. 59).
. The next three steps are very important and
should be done slowly.
12. Open the zipper very carefully to hold it
in position ; as you do this
FIGURE 58
FIGURE 59
1817
'a. ■%..
X
'»•wi-
!8
FIGURE 60 "■-"•"'
13. Separate the facing and the left front,
holding the zipper in place, and
14. Kepin the zipper to the facing only ; baste.
15. Machine-stitch the outer edge of the zipper tape to the facing.
16. Stitch the zipper tape to the facing a
second time, stitching just as close to the zipper
as ])ossible. For this, use a zipper foot (fig. 60).
17. Open the zijjper, then uiachine-stitch the
left front facing to the trousers, following the
stitching marks (figs. 61,62).
18. Reinforce the bottom of the placket with
several rows of forwai'd and reverse stitching
or satin stitch made with the zigzagger or on a
swing-needle macliine.
19. Machine-stitch the lower section of the
facing to the crotch seam.
Kimono Sleeves
Kimono sleeve reinforcement.—Reinforcing
kimono sleeves at the miderarm curve as tliey are
being made takes a little more sewing time, but
saves considerable mending time and lengthens
the life of the garment. For the reinforcement, use
a narrow tape, a preshrunk selvage from the nuiterial, or a % inch strip of bias (fig. 63).
FiGUKE 61
'9 0Y' »í^.'-'-í
-"31 FiGUKE 62 °N-"3^
FIGURE 63
19FIGURE 64
FIGURE 65
FIGURE 66
1. Press the seams open iiiid finish the edges,
or turn the seams to one side, depending on the
fabric or garment.
2. Clip where necessary to make tlie seam lie
flat at the underarm curve. Do not clip closer
than 1/4 inch to the stitching line.
3. Machine- or hand-stitch a strip of narrow
self-fabric, about % inch wide to the curved
seam, stitching over the seam line and about
%e inch on each side of it.
Underarm gusset.—Gussets are needed in
close-fitting kimono or drop shoulder sleeves to
allow room for reaching, but the corners need
to be reinforced. Gussets should be used only
on materials that are firmly woven; if the fabric frays badly the corners will pull out, no matter
how strongly they are reinforced (fig. 64).
1. On the wrong side draw stitching lines
from the point through the seam marks.
2. Sew on these lines with a small stitch, from
18 to 20 to the inch. Take one stitch across the
point before stitching down the other side so
the seam edge at the point will turn under
smoothly.
3. Cut down the center, just to the stitching.
4. Pin and baste the gusset to the slashed
opening. Stitch just beyond the first stitching
line.
5. Press the seams away from the gusset;
machine-stitch on the outside fold on wash garments. A second row gives additional strength.
6. On better clothes, whei'e the outside stitching might not be desirable, after the gusset has
been stitched in place, stitch across and through
the point on the wrong side.
Attaching Cuffs
Cuffs should be attached to sleeves so the finish
is flat and inconspicuous for ease of ironing and
attractive appearance. If the pattern does not call
for cuffs, a cuff can be made from a straight or
bias strip. Cut it the length of the sleeve circumference plus two seam allowances and two
seams' width more than the desired finished cuff
width.
Cuffs without bias facing.—The following
method is a quick and easy way of attacliing cuffs
to school, utility, and some better clothes. Finish
the upper edge of the cuff; turn rigiit side out;
press (fig. 65).
1. With the cuff right side out against the
right side of the sleeve, pin, baste if necessary,
and stitch the underneath section of the cuff to
the sleeve.
2. Trim the seam allowance to 1/4 or 'Yie inch.
3. Press the seam up toward the sleeve.
4. From the right side, stitch the top cuff to
20' the bottom of the sleeve just inside the first row
of stitching. This stitching keeps the top cuff
in place.
5. Turn under the raw edge of the top cuff,
clipping, if necessary, to make it lie flat. Machine-stitch to sleeve.
When cuffs are being attached to a better dress,
proceed through Step 3 ; then finish the loose edge
of the top cuff so it won't fray—pink, overcast,
zigzag, turn under, and stitch or bind. Slip-stitch
or catch-stitch the cuff edge to the sleeve.
Cuifs stitched to the right side.—The following method is a very quick but durable way of attaching cuffs to utility and better clothes made of
fabrics that do not fray badly.- A finished cuff is
used here, ready to be sewn to the sleeve (fig. 66).
1. Pin the right side of the finislied cuff to
the wrong side of the sleeve ; machine-stitch.
2. Trim the seam allowance to i^ inch; pink
or zigzag, if necessary.
3. Press the seam edges toward the sleeve.
4. Machine-stitch the sleeve through the seam
edges close to the first row of stitching; this
stitching makes the cuff easy to turn up and
keeps the sleeve edge finish flat.
5. In utility clothes, machine-stitch the seam
edge to the sleeve the width of the presser foot
from the stitching in Step 4. Omit in better
garments.
6. Turn the cuff to the light side.
Finishing Pockets
Hemmed patch pockets.—A simplified and neat
way of finishing the top of a patch pocket (fig. 67).
1. Turn the pocket hem to the right side along
the fold marks.
2. Turn up the hem edge 14 inch. On thick
materials, zigzag, pink, or overcast this edge to
keep the pocket flat. On some mateiials that
fray but are not washable, finish the edge with
seam tape.
3. Stitch across both ends of the pocket hem,
a seam's width from the edge.
4. Trim the seam allowance to % inch; clip
the comers almost to stitching,
5. Turn the pocket hem to the wrong side,
working the seam out to the edge and picking
out the corners so they are sharp.
6. Turn under the pocket sides and the lower
edge on the seam lines. Press the entire pocket.
7. Trim off the corner seam allowances diagonally, almost to the comer.
8. Machine-stitch the top hem on pockets for
shirts, school, and work clothes. For better
garments, tack invisibly by hand.
'ipHB^'
Í .i
\ 1
~« I "-'"■' J .-.-^
<■
-
\
!
't^ ■~..ß
' ' '
«¡-.>
Í
.«^ i
'ts,**:ïî?>>iJ ■
-3
'■^f^^..
i".' ' "ï''iFIGURE 68
Faced patch pockets.—An easy way of facing
pockets so all the outside edges are finished before
the pocket is turned right side out. Used on suits,
jackets, coats, and some dresses where a firm
pocket is desired (fig. 68).
1. Turn the upper edge of the pocket lining
down 1/^ inch ; pin and baste to the right side of
the pocket, lower and side edges matching.
2. Turn the pocket hem over the lining; pin
and baste.
21FiGUKE 71 ™-" FIGURE 72 "'^-"" FIGURE 73 '^''-"^^ FIGURE 74 O-^'-HSOB
223. Baste and machine-stitch tlie sides and the
bottom of the pocliet and tlie pocket lining
througli the liem to the top of tlie pocket.
4. Trim off the seam allowance to 14 inch;
clip the corners almost to the stitching.
5. Turn the pocket I'iglit side ont.
6. Baste and press tlie pocket sides and the
bottom so the seam line is slightly underneath.
7. Slip-stitch the top of the lining to the
pocket hem.
8. Finished pocket, i^eady to sew to garment,
by hand or machine.
Side pocket for slacks, trousers, shorts; a hip
pocket on dresses.—A simplified way of putting
in these pockets so they fit smoothly. When making slacks or trousers, finish the pockets up to Step
10, figure 72, before putting in the front placket
and the crotch seams. When putting this type of
pocket into dresses, begin with Step 2, figure 70.
1. Turn under and press the inside seam edges
of the pocket facings. Pin flat to the pocket;
baste, if necessary ; machine-stitch (fig. 69).
2. Pin the pocket to the side seam of slacks
front, the right side of the pocket to the right
side of the slacks. Machine-stitch between the
pocket marks, a seam's width from the edge.
3. At each end of stitching, clip the seam allowance straight in to the stitching line.
4. Trim the seam allowance on the pocket
opening to about %6 inch (fig. 70).
5. Turn the pocket to the wrong side, creasing exactly on the stitching line; press. Machine-stitch a presser foot's width from the fold.
This stitching may be omitted on dress pockets.
6. Press the seam edges flat above and below
the pocket "mouth," so they can be sewed
smoothly to the back seams (fig. 71).
7. Pin the pocket edges together, right sides
inside. Be sure both sides of the pocket are
flat (fig. 72).
8. Stitch the pocket edges together, starting
at the bottom of the opening, stitching straight
in about i/4 inch or so past the seam line so the
pocket will not be caught into the side seam.
Turn and continue seaming the bottom of the
pocket.
9. Stitch the top of the pocket to the side
seam edge.
10. Trim the seam allowance of the pocket to
%6 or 1/2 inch. Can be stitched a second time
1^ inch from the first stitching for reinforcement. Pink the edges, or zigzag those that fray.
11. Stitch the back section of the slacks to the
front section and the pocket, taking care not to
catch the pocket "mouth" in this stitching.
12. On the right side, reinforce each end of
the pocket on slacks and trousers with several
rows of forward and reverse stitching, or close
zigzag stitches (figs. 73,74).
Finishing Hems
Suit the hem finish to the material and the type
of garment. However, in all dress, skirt, or coat
hems, the first step is to mark the length an even
distance from the floor. To measure, hold the
ruler straight or use a measuring device that
stands upright (fig. 75). Turn up the hem on
these marks ; pin, baste, and press. Then trim off
the material so the hem is an even width from the
fold (fig. 76).
•X;\
FIGURE 75 »"-, . 4
"3
1?.
FIGURE 77
FIGURE 78
FIGURE 79
Turned and slip-stitched hems.—For use on
light- and medium-weight materials such as voile,
gingham, chambray, and sheers of silks and
synthetics (fig. 77).
1. Turn under the top of the hem about Yi
inch.
2. Machine-stitch about %e inch from the
fold. If the hem is straight, use about 12 to 15
stitches per inch. If it is curved, use 6 to 8
stitches to the inch and pull up the underneath
thread to ease the fullness in top of the hem
to fit the dress. Lay out on a flat surface to
keep the hem flat against the garment.
3. Pin or baste, about ^4 inch below the fold.
4. Slip-stitch the underneath side of the hem
to the dress, along the stitching. Take back
stitches every third or fourth stitch. This
method keeps the stitching under the hem; it
gets little abrasion from wear or laundering;
and the stitches do not catch and break. It is
a quicker method than hemming along the fold
and gives a neater appearance on the right side.
Flat hem, slip-stitched.—For heavier fabrics—
linens, coatings, spun rayons, failles, and similar
fabrics (fig. 78).
1. Pink, overcast, or machine-zigzag the edge
of the evened-oiï hem.
2. Machine-stitch about %g inch down from
the edge. Pull up the underneath threads, if
necessary, to ease in any fullness.
3. Slip-stitch, rolling the top edge of the hem
away from the dress ; catch the stitches into the
row of machine-stitching.
Machine-hemmed.—One of the quickest ways
of putting in a hem is to use a machine attachment or a swing-needle machine. The hem is
particularly strong for school and utility clothes.
1. Turn under the hem edge I/2 inch.
2. Baste the hem to the skirt about % inch
below the folded edge.
3. Fold the skirt back on the basting line and
stitch (fig. 79).
FIGURE 80
Machine-stitched hem.—For aprons, shirts, circular skirts (fig. 80).
1. Machine-stitch around the hem, % inch
from the edge.
2. Machine-stitch around the hem again, the
width of the wide edge of the presser foot
from the first row; these two rows of machine
stitching serve as a guide in turning the hem
edge up and under quickly and evenly.
3. Turn under just beyond each row of stitching ; press ; baste, if needed.
4. Machine-stitch around the top and the
bottom of the hem. Stitch from the right side
with the presser foot as a guide for best appearance.
2ASf^ a P !■ tt «■ 1 V A t ti *- - S. 1 1 . ¡. ¡ •
' * " 1 ,. ^ ■• .
■ ^ " ' _' J ^ .í a * í
;%' "'.'-V-
„,' . h-í,»l<'''%«
":-}.l:'':'{Ú
»■V .' , . - - -. I í" ■> «.,. f
K.fl-'S-JÍSi»«--
. -:;: « ', ^ts!RÍl!>*!í5rU-s^r
#\^''"'- '»-«íf'Jí- »- '. ^
jg::: :*R;::;;:r '
* ' !-'(■=>,
:;;;::■::;::':-;■:":-::
FIGURE 81 FIGURE 82
Fastenings
Strip buttonholes.—Easy-to-make substitutes
for lengthwise worlted or bound buttonholes on a
tailored dress or blouse. To make the finished
ed¿e as flat as possible, cut the front facing in one
with the front (fig. 81).
1. Cut a strip of straight or bias fabric four
times the desired finislied width of the buttonhole binding. A finished binding % inch wide
gives a neat appearance.
2. Turn under the top edge of the strip %
inch.
3. Fin the strip to the garment, with the seam
line of the strip exactly over the center front
line and the top edge level with the neck seam
line.
4. Mark the top and the bottom ends of each
buttonhole an equal distance apart.
5. Machine-stitch on the center front line between each buttonhole, being sure to
6. Back-stitch at the beginning and end of
each section of stitching.
7. Press the facing to the inside of the garment.
8. Press buttonhole strip away from the
blouse.
9. Turn under the outer edge of the strip so
the fold meets the stitching line and the
folded strip is the desired width. For a narrower binding, trim it down before turning.
10. Overhand the strip to the stitching line
between buttonhole openings, taking several
back stitches at the beginning and end of each
buttonhole.
11. At the buttonhole openings, overhand the
loose, folded edges together.
12. Finished buttonhole strip (fig. 82).
Hammered-in snap fasteners.—Fasteners of
this type are strong and easy to attach, well suited
to utility clothes, but need strong reinforcement to
keep them from straining and tearing the garment.
With separate stay (fig. 83)
1. Press the facing back to the right side,
turning on the front fold marks. Stitch the
neck edge from the fold to the collar point and
trim the seam allowance to about % inch.
2. Lay a strip of firm fabric against the facing, with the edge next to the front fold. Pin
or baste in place.
Facing stay (fig. 84)
1. Press the facing to the right side, turning
on the front fold marks.
25FIGURE 83
FIGURE 86
FIGURE 87
FIGURE 84 DN-1152R FIGURE 85 DN-HROB
2. Fold the facing back again toward tlie
front, until the straight edge lies along the
front fold.
3. Stitch and trim the neck edge; clip to the
center front.
To finish both (fig. 85) —
4. Turn the facings to the wrong side ; press.
5. Machine-stitch down both sides of the
center front so the stitching will catch both
edges of the stay. The machine stitching helps
reinforce the fastenings. Both left and right
fronts should be made the same way.
Trim Finishing
Simple, quick-to-make trim that gives a professional look to an otherwise uninteresting garment
DN-1155A FIGURE 88
26may be made with skillful handling of modern
machine attachments. The trims that are shown
here are effective, yet easy to make.
Zigzag stitch makes a simple, durable edge
finish for collars, cuffs, and yokes that strengthens
as well as decorates (fig. 86).
Smocking on blouses and dresses for little girls
is effective but time-consuming. A quick way of
getting a similar effect is as follows:
1. Lengthen the machine stitch and, witli the
edge of the pressei' foot as a guide, make several
rows of stitching spaced evenly apart.
2. Pull the underneath threads to adjust the
gathers, then fasten the threads.
3. Machine-stitch over each row of stitching
with contrasting or matcliing thread to hold
the gathers in place (fig. 87), or
4. Make decorative stitches such as couching
or chain-stitch with embroidery thread; such
stitches hold the gathers in place and give a
semblance of smocking (fig. 88).
Novelty embroidery stitches can be made by
machine (fig. 89). Decorative stitches can be
made automatically with an attachinent, or on a
swing-needle machine, and are effective when well
used.
Tucks take extra time to make, but they are an
inexpensive, easy-to-iron, and durable type of
trim (fig. 90).
1. With small dots lightly mark the fold
line of the first tuck, using a rule to be sure
the line will be straight and will be on the
straight of the goods. A transparent ruler is
convenient for tliis.
2. Measure the distance to the next fold line
and mark. liepeat for all tlie tucks needed.
?>. Crease and damp press each fold line.
4. Adjust the edge-stitcher—a machine attachment—or the seam guide to the desired
tuck width and stitch the tucks. If tlie tucks
are wide, or the material is slippery, each tuck
niiiy need to be basted before being stitched.
To tuck a yoke, collar, or cuff's when the pattern does not allow for it, tuck a piece of material large enough for the section and then cut
it out, following the i)attern.
Lace may be sewed on lingerie, robes, and
dresses quickly and easily by machine with a zigzag stitch nuide witli an attachment or on a
swing-needle machine (1), or with a straight
stitch (2). The straight stitch generally is better for di'esses and the zigzag stitch for lingerie.
The edges of firmly woven fabrics that are unlikely to fray may be left unfinished under the
lace. Other materials should be hennned or faced
before the lace is sewed on, or the edges may be
handrolled afterward. The latter method is a
good one to use on blouses and dresses (fig. 91).
Ifö-''''"'
■I ■■■"■
;■.■■''
!.■.■■■■■
FIGURE 89
FIGURE 90
FIGURE 91
27Attaching Yokes
The following method is an easy way of making yokes that fit smootlily. Whether tile yoke
is romid, square, or pointed, and for a blouse or
a skirt, the method of making it is the same. A
blouse yoke is shown hei-e (fig. 92).
FIGURE 92
1. Mark the yoke seam line by adjusting the
seam guide just a little less than a seam's width
from the needle and stitching around the yoke.
Hold the cloth evenly against the seam guide
while stitching, taking care not to stretch or
pucker the yoke edge. If the fabric is slippery
or twists easily, this stitching may need to be
done over a whole tissue-paper pattern.
2. Turn the yoke edge to the underside, just
past the stitching line. Pin; baste, if necessary; press.
3. Pin the yoke flat over the joining garment
section, with the raw edges meeting as closely
as possible on the wrong side and notches
matching. In order to keep the two sections
flat for a good fit, it is not always possible to
make the seam edges meet. Baste; machinestitch close to the edge.
If it is preferred that the machine stitching
not show, slip-baste the folded edge to the lower
blouse section; then on the wrong side, open out
the pieces so the seam edges are flat against the
sewing machine and stitch over the hand basting.
Adjusting Gathers
Gather by machine to save time and to achieve
an evenly distributed fullness. There are several
ways of doing it, depending on the amount of
fullness wanted.
Ruffler (fig. 93).—A moderate amount of waistline fullness as in little girls' skirts can be
gathered or worked into small, close pleats (1)
very easily with a ruiner.
Gathering foot (fig. 93).—A slight amount of
gathers (2) can be put in quickly with tlie gathering foot. This foot can also be used for shirring.
Long machine stitch (fig. 94).—When fullness
needs to be adjusted to fit, the gathers may be put
in by sewing with a long machine stitch, from 6
FIGURE 93
to 8 to the inch, then pulling up the underneath
threads (3). One row of gathers at the seam line
and Yg incli on each side of it help to distribute
the gathers evenly. This method is an easy way
to take care of tlie extra material in the tops of
set-in sleeves (fig. 95) and to work in elbow
fullness in long sleeves. It is also a quick but
FIGURE 94
' ■ .^^^i'^aii».
FIGURE 95
28satisfactory way of easing a very full skirt to a
small waist. To simplify working on long lengths
of fabric, gather between seams, then pull up each
section.
When fullness needs to be close fitting, yet
adjustable, it can be held in with elastic thread
or webbing.
Elastic thread (fig. 96).—Use of elastic thread
makes fullness at sleeves and waistlines soft and
comfortable. Wind the elastic thread on the bobbin by hand and lengthen the stitch to about 8
or 9 to the inch. The thread gathers as you
stitch. '
FIGURE 96
Elastic (fig. 97) can be inserted in a casing, or
if narrow, sewed on with a zigzag stitch wide
enough to cover the elastic.
FIGURE 97
Elastic webbing (fig. 98) makes a comfortable,
adjustable waistline finish for shorts, briefs, and
pajamas. For easy application, divide the waist
edge and a snug waist length of webbing into
eighths, and pin the elastic to the waistline with
the respective points matching. Pin in between
these points to hold the elastic in place during
sewing. Basting is little or no help here. Stretch
the elastic to fit the fabric edge as it is sewed,
pulling with both hands to hold it flat against
iP'
'■-»*. .^A..
FIGURE 98
the material. Elastic webbing can be sewed on
with
1. Straight stitch: Lengthen the stitch to
about 8 stitches to the inch.
2. Zigzag stitch: Use the attachment or the
swing-needle machine. Adjust to a moderately
deep stitch, a little less than i/g inch, so the
stitching can stretch with the elastic.
Casing Openings
Casing openings are needed for mserting or
fastening a drawstring, ribbon, or elastic as at the
neckline, sleeve, or waistline. Two finishes suitable for neck edges and one for waistline openings
of pajamas or shorts are shown here.
FIGURE 99
Buttonhole (fig. 99).—A neat finish for the
right side of a neck edge, sleeve, or waistline.
1. Make two buttonholes by machine, about
14 inch apart, where the opening is to be. If
ribbon is to be used as a drawstring and is to
show, make the buttonholes on the garment ; if
the drawstring is to be concealed, make the buttonholes in the hem or facing. In each case,
make them before the hem or facing is sewed
down.
2. Stitch a facing to a curved edge, right
sides together, and trim the seam allowance to
i/i inch. If the edge is straight, it may be
hemmed.
29FIGURE 100
3. Turn the hem or facino- to the wrong side ;
press ; stitch close to the neck edge.
4. Stitch the other edge of the facing or the
hem to the garment.
Hemmed opening (fig. 100).—
1. Shape bias tape to fit the neckline, with the
inside edge pressed open, or use a shaped facing.
2. Fold the tape or facing ends back so they
just meet to form the opening; pin, baste, and
stitch the tape to the garment.
3. Trim the seam allowance to i/g inch.
4. Turn to the wrong side ; press ; stitch close
to the edge.
5. Stitch the other edge of the tape or facing
to the garment.
In-seam opening (fig. 101).—An easy way to
finish a waistline openmg when elastic or drawstring is to be used. The opening may be in the
side, center-front, or center-back seams.
Í2' fli
3 «H^Bi
-
\
WÊÊÊBÊm
').,,
i!
4-
1 i
i
f 9
■
\s
_^_^^ ^n
1 : ._.^.......^.5
FiGUKE 101
1. Stitch the seams up to tlie hem marks.
•2. ^Vbove the hem marks, press the seams
open.
3. Turn under the seam edges to make a i/4-
inch hem on each side. If the seams are flat
■fell, clip the seam as far as the stitching line so
the edges will turn back flat.
4. Machine-stitch hems of opening ; if flat-fell
seams are to be used, stitch one hem and the
second row of the seam at one time.
5. Turn the top hem to the wrong side. Machine-stitch the hem, making two rows at the
bottom and one row along the upper edge. This
method keeps the seam opening on the wrong
side.
Finishing Belts
Fabric or ribbon belts can be finished to look
professional at little cost. The belt end is usually
the hardest part to make. Some easy ways are
as follows:
Belt of grosgrain ribbon or belting (fig. 102)
1. Fold a piece of ribbon two times the length
of the finished belt in half crosswise at the midpoint of the belt ; stitch straight across the belt
with short machine stitches. This makes the
point of the belt.
2. Fold one piece of the belt back under the
other, with the stitching dowm the center.
3. Crease the belting on each side of the
stitching to make points that are identical on
each side.
4. Edge-stitch the belt and point. If a firmer
belt is desired, insert belting or stiffening before
the edges are stitched together.
Self-material over belting (fig. 103).—An
easy-to-make and durable belt for utility and
school clothes. Be sure the belting is washable and
has a permanent finish.
1. Cut a belt strip % inch wider than twice
the width of the belting ; turn under and press
so that the raw edges meet in the center.
2. Fold the belt end back in the middle,
wrong side out, and stitch across the end.
3. Turn the belt end right side out ; press.
4. Baste and stitch the belt to the belting
along both sides and point.
5. Trim off the belting end slightly under the
fabric edge.
6. Finished belt.
Self-material bslts (fig. 104).—An easy-tomake tie belt for aprons, house and school dresses.
1. Hem both sides of the belt.
2. Fold the belt end lengthwise, wrong side
outside; stitch.
3. Turn the belt end right side out; press.
4. Stitch across belt end.
Eyelets for belts (fig. 105).—Openings for the
tongue of a belt buckle are not difficult to finish.
Eyelets may be hand worked with a blanket or
overhand stitch, or metal eyelets may be inserted
with an inexpensive attachment.
30FIGURE 102 FIGURE 103 FIGURE 104
FIGURE 105
EQUIPMENT
Proper tools are needed to make sewing easy as
well as accurate. The ones found useful for most
home sewing are listed below :
Cutting and Sewing Aids
Cutting shears.—At least 8 inches long, wñth
blades that cut precisely to the point.
Scissors.—Small ones, about 5 inches long for
such work as cutting threads.
Pins.—Silk dressmaker pins, size 16. This
size is suitable for working on most fabrics.
Tape measure.—Get one that will not stretch,
either of fabric or a rollup metal.
Colored-clialk pencils.-—For easy marking
of pattern perforations; the marks can be
brushed off quickly when no longer needed.
Needles for hand sewing.—Size 7 or 8
needles are strong enough for sewing heavy
: fabrics such as work cottons. A finer needle,
size 9 or 10, is easier to use on fine wools, silks,
cottons, and other lightweight fabrics. Crewel
needles, those with large eyes, are easy to thread.
There are also needles with ''threaders" attached; they are good for basting.
Thimble.—Get a thimble that fits snugly so
it will not drop off the finger while sewing, but
not so tight as to be uncomfortable. When
buying a thimble, try it on for a perfect fit.
Colored thread.—Contrasting basing thread
is easy to follow when stitching.
Ruler, 6-inch transparent.—Get a ruler with
%-inch markings on both sides and ends. _ It
can be used as a guide when basting or marking
seam widths and corners.
Cloth guide.—A machine attachment to guide
to the edge of the fabric while stitching. Aids
in making the stitching even.
Seam-width marker.—A small gummed
marker to be fastened on to the machine throat
plate. Saves time when the cloth guide needs
adjusting. Throat plates with permanent indications of stitching width are now available
on many machines.
Bias cutting guide.—A small attachment to
be slipped on a scissor blade to aid in cutting
bias strips of fabric evenly.
Pencil sharpener.—Get a small, inexpensive
one for keeping sharp points on pencils to be
used for marking notches and perforations.
Hem marker.—Get an accurate one for marking skirt lengths. Hem markers requiring a
second person to pin the length are more accurate than those that are self-operating.
Stiletto.—A sharp instrument for punching
eyelets and removing bastings.
31Ironing Aids
Careful pressing often saves basting and is a
help in producing attractive, well-made garments.
The following equipment is needed for pressing:
Iron.—Preferably an automatic one, with a
temperature indicator which prevents damage
to heat-sensitive fabrics.
Ironing board.—Have a well-padded ironing
board that can be lowered to sitting height. It
is convenient for small pressing jobs and can
serve also as a sewing table between pressings.
Press cloths.—These cloths are needed for
pressing fabrics likely to be damaged by direct
contact with the iron. There are many good
ones specially treated to make pressing effective—heavy cotton ones for use on wools, nonwoven cloths for most-^materials, and those
made of organdie witK see-through qualities.
Sponge.—A cellulose sponge for dampening
fabrics or press cloths; it spreads the moisture
evenly and is more serviceable than natural
sponges.
Water container.—A convenience at the ironing board. Use the lid to rest the sponge on
between usings.
Machine-Attachment Aids
Some sewing processes can be done quickly and
satisfactorily by machine, particularly on work
and school clothes. Buttonholes, hems, seam finishing can be done on a swing-needle machine, or
by means of the following special machine attachments :
Buttonholer.—A useful attachment for making buttonholes on men's shirts, on housedresses,
and on school clothes.
Edge-stitcher.—For keeping outside stitching very close to the edge.
Gathering foot.—For gathering long lengths
of fabric.
Narrow hemmer.
ruffles.
Overcaster.—For finishing seam edges on
fabrics that fray badly.
Ruffler.—For gathering such things as skirts
into small, flat pleats.
Zigzagger.—For finishing seam edges of such
fabrics as rayons, linens, and some wools that
will fray badly.
-For making tiny hems on
Publications of the U. S. Department of Agriculture that provide further information on home
construction of clothing are listed below :
How To Tailor a Woman's Suit, Home and
Garden Bulletin No. 20
Fitting Coats and Suits, Home and Garden
Bulletin No. 11
This is a C^JMlíiXÁM^ QOUÙJU/oi \jSDA
Agricultural Research Service
This publication supersedes Farmers' Bulletin 1954, Making a Dress at Home
Washington, D.C.
Issued March 1959
Slightly revised September 1965
For sole by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
Woshington, D.C, 20402 - Price 25 cents
32 U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1965 O—782-691